PYHESSIAN: Neural Networks Through the
Lens of the HessianZhewei Yao∗, Amir Gholami∗, Kurt Keutzer, Michael W. Mahoney
University of California, Berkeley{zheweiy, amirgh, keutzer, mahoneymw}@berkeley.eduAbstract—We present PYHESSIAN, a new scalable framework
that enables fast computation of Hessian (i.e., second-order
derivative) information for deep neural networks. PYHESSIANenables fast computations of the top Hessian eigenvalues, the Hessian trace, and the full Hessian eigenvalue/spectral density, and it
supports distributed-memory execution on cloud/supercomputer
systems and is available as open source [1]. This general framework can be used to analyze neural network models, including
the topology of the loss landscape (i.e., curvature information)
to gain insight into the behavior of different models/optimizers.
To illustrate this, we analyze the effect of residual connections
and Batch Normalization layers on the trainability of neural
networks. One recent claim, based on simpler first-order analysis,
is that residual connections and Batch Normalization make the
loss landscape “smoother”, thus making it easier for Stochastic
Gradient Descent to converge to a good solution. Our extensive
analysis shows new finer-scale insights, demonstrating that, while
conventional wisdom is sometimes validated, in other cases it is
simply incorrect. In particular, we find that Batch Normalization
does not necessarily make the loss landscape smoother, especially
for shallower networks.I. INTRODUCTIONResidual neural networks [25] (ResNets) are widely used
Neural Networks (NNs) for various learning tasks. The two
main architectural components of ResNets are residual connections [25] and Batch Normalization (BN) layers [26]. However,
going beyond motivating stories to characterize precisely when
and why these two popular architectural ingredients help or
hurt training/generalization—especially in terms of measurableproperties of the model—is still largely unsolved. Relatedly,
characterizing whether other suggested architectural changes
will help or hurt training/generalization is still done in a largely
ad hoc manner. For example, it is often motivated by plausible
but untested intuitions, and it is not characterized in terms of
measurable properties of the model.
In this work, we present and apply PYHESSIAN, an open
source scalable framework with which one can directly analyze Hessian information, i.e., second-derivative information
w.r.t. model parameters, in order to address these and related questions. PYHESSIAN computes Hessian information by
applying known techniques from Numerical Linear Algebra
(NLA) [5, 22, 30] and Randomized NLA (RandNLA) [4, 18,
19, 33, 48, 53] (that are approximate but come with rigorous
theory). PYHESSIAN enables computing Hessian information—
including top Hessian eigenvalues, Hessian trace, and Hessian
eigenvalue spectral density (ESD), and it supports distributed∗Equal contribution.implementation—allowing distributed-memory execution on
both cloud (e.g., AWS, Google Cloud) and supercomputer
systems, for fast and efficient Hessian computation.
As an application of PYHESSIAN, we use it to analyze
the impact of residual connections and BN on the trainability
of NNs, leading to new insights. In more detail, our main
contributions are the following:• We introduce PYHESSIAN, a new framework for direct and
efficient computation of Hessian information, including
the top eigenvalue, the trace, and the full ESD [1]. We
also apply PYHESSIAN to study how residual connections
and BN affect training.• We observe that removing BN layers from ResNet
(denoted below as ResNet−BN ) leads to rapid increase
of the Hessian spectrum (the top eigenvalue, the trace,
and the ESD support range). This increase is significantly
more rapid for deeper models. See Figure 2, A.11, A.12,
and A.13 on Cifar-10 as well as Figure A.9, A.15, A.16,
and A.17 on Cifar-100.• We observe that, for shallower networks (ResNet20),
removing the BN layer results in a flatter Hessian spectrum,
as compared to standard ResNet20 with BN. See Figure 2
and 3 on Cifar-10 and Figure A.9 and A.15 on Cifar100. This observation is the opposite of the common
belief that the addition of BN layers make the loss
landscape smoother (which we observe to hold only for
deeper networks).• We observe that, for deeper networks (in our case,
ResNet32/38), removing BN results in converging to
sharper local minima, as compared to ResNet with BN.
See Figure 2, 3, A.19 and A.20 on Cifar-10 as well
as Figure A.9, A.15, A.23 and A.24 on Cifar-100.• We show that removing residual connections from
ResNet generally makes the top eigenvalue, the trace,
and the Hessian ESD support range increase slightly.
This increase is consistent for both shallower and
deeper models (ResNet20/32/38/56). See Figure 2, 3,
A.14, A.18, A.19, A.20, and A.21 on Cifar-10 as well
as Figure A.9, A.15, A.22, A.23, and A.24 on Cifar-100.• We perform Hessian analysis for different stages of
ResNet models (details in Section IV-A), and we find that
generally BN is more important for the final stagesthan for earlier stages. In particular, removing BN from
the last stage significantly degrades testing performance,